/* This ain't really TeXinfo.  Please do not attempt to compile this. */

Svnlook is used to examine a txn or revision tree in the various ways a
hook program might want.  The `svnlook' program produces output that is
both human- and machine-readable, so hook scripts can easily parse it.
   
   svnlook repos [txn|rev] ID  [subcommand ...]
   
With no subcommand, the default output contains:
   
   - log message
   - author
   - date (in revision case)
   - The tree, in summary form similar to `svnadmin's output.
   
Subcommands are:
   
   - log:           log message to stdout.
   - author:        author to stdout
   - date:          date to stdout (only for revs, not txns)
   - dirs-changed:  directories in which things were changed
   - changed:       full change summary: all dirs & files changed
   - diff:          GNU diffs of changed files, prop diffs too

Default output format:

   AUTHOR - The author, followed by newline.
   DATE - Timestamp in ISO8601 format ("YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm GMT") in the 
          revision case, or the empty string in the transaction case.  
          In either case, this will be followed by a newline.
   LOGSIZE - Length in bytes of log message, followed by newline.
   LOG - Log message, followed by newline.
   TREE - Format is consistent with that used by svnadmin.  Once
          stabilized, we will document that format here.

Subcommand output formats:

   "log":
   "author":
   "date":

      These are trivial.  All are followed by a newline.

   "dirs-changed":

      Newline-separated list of directories in which a file or a
      directory property was modified.

   "changed":

      Print a summary of the change in the same format used by `svn
      update'.

   "diff":

      TBD.  Show added and modified files in GNU diff format, property
      modifications and removed files/dirs in some other (yet
      undetermined) fashion.      
