\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@comment Subversion Handbook
@comment Copyright (C) 2000-2004 CollabNet

@c  ================================================================
@c  Copyright (c) 2000-2004 CollabNet.  All rights reserved.
@c  
@c  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
@c  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
@c  met:
@c  
@c  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
@c  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@c  
@c  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
@c  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
@c  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@c  
@c  3. The end-user documentation included with the redistribution, if
@c  any, must include the following acknowledgment: ``This product includes
@c  software developed by CollabNet (uref{http://www.Collab.Net/}).''
@c  Alternately, this acknowledgment may appear in the software itself, if
@c  and wherever such third-party acknowledgments normally appear.
@c  
@c  4. The hosted project names must not be used to endorse or promote
@c  products derived from this software without prior written
@c  permission. For written permission, please contact info@collab.net.
@c  
@c  5. Products derived from this software may not use the ``Tigris'' name
@c  nor may ``Tigris'' appear in their names without prior written
@c  permission of CollabNet.
@c  
@c  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED
@c  WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
@c  MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
@c  IN NO EVENT SHALL COLLABNET OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
@c  DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
@c  DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
@c  GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
@c  INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
@c  IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
@c  OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
@c  ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
@c 
@c  ====================================================================
@c  
@c  This software consists of voluntary contributions made by many
@c  individuals on behalf of CollabNet.

@c Note du traducteur :
@c
@c * Cette traduction est un traduction qui suit au plus près la version
@c   anglaise.
@c * Je ne connais pas le format .texi. Il doit donc y avoir des erreurs.
@c
@c * Cette traduction s'est appuiée sur la version 2576 de Subversion.
@c
@c * voici certaine correspondance anglais-français.
@c   - handbook => manuel
@c   - revision control system => système de contrôle de version
@c   - commit => requête de prise en compte de changement.
@c   - commit => requête de changement.
@c   - commit => souvent considéré comme "check in"
@c   - hackability => capacité d'adaptation.
@c   - pristine version => version de référence.
@c   - check out => descendre
@c   - check in => remonter
@c   - out-of-date => dépassé
@c   - current => actuel
@c   - log message => description de modification
@c   - time machine => rien. Les phrases qui utilise çà ont été zappées.

@c %**start of header
@setfilename svn-handbook-french.info
@settitle Le guide de Subversion
@setchapternewpage odd

@c for dvi, ps, ... print on A4 format.
@afourpaper
@c doesn't work
@c @documentlanguage fr

@c use for html output
@documentencoding ISO-8859-1
@c %**end of header

@paragraphindent 0

@c @finalout

@c Browser defaults lose.  Let's go for black text on white background.
@ifhtml
@html
<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF" fgcolor="#000000">
@end html
@end ifhtml

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@titlepage
@title @titlefont{Le guide de Subversion}
@author Subversion Development Project @uref{http://subversion.tigris.org/}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2000-2003 CollabNet, Inc. @*
See @ref{License} for details. @*
First version: June 2002. @*
$LastChangedDate: 2002-07-30 04:23:44 -0400 (mar, 30 jui 2002) $

@end titlepage
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------

@summarycontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top

Ce manuel est un guide du système de contrôle de version Subverion.

Ndt: C'est la traduction du manual en anglais de la révision 2752
(post version 0.14.0).
Je n'ai pas fait cette traduction pour devenir un ``fork'' de la version
anglaise. Ainsi, les erreurs/manques de la version anglaise sont dans
cette traduction. Les corrections seront faites (peut-être) lorsque la
version anglaise sera corrigée. Ceci pour des raisons évidentes de
maintenance de cette traduction.
Je ne suis pas très satisfait de la traduction des parties très
techniques. J'espère néanmoins qu'elle vous sera utile.

@end ifnottex

@iftex
Ndt: La version dvi et ps n'a pas d'accents. C'est une limitation de
makeinfo qui ne permet pas d'avoir simplement les accents dans les version
info/html et dans les version dvi/ps.
@end iftex

@c Here is our logical table of contents.

@menu
* Débuter avec Subversion::   Historique, installation et vue d'ensemble de Subversion.
* Utilisation des clients::   Utilisation des clients de subversion.
* Administration des Dépôts:: Gestion des dépôts.
* Appendices::                D'autres documents et références.
@end menu

@include getting_started.texi
@include client.texi
@include repos_admin.texi
@include appendices.texi

@bye
