@node Client
@chapter Client

The Subversion client is built on three libraries.  One operates
strictly on the working copy and does not talk to the repository.
Another talks to the repository but never changes the working copy.  The
third library uses the first two to provide operations such as
@code{commit} and @code{update} -- operations which need to both talk to
the repository and change the working copy.

The initial client is a Unix-style command-line tool (like standard
CVS), but it should be easy to write a GUI client as well, based on the
same libraries.  The libraries capture the core Subversion
functionality, segregating it from user interface concerns.

This chapter describes the libraries, and the physical layout of working
copies.

@menu
* Working copies and the working copy library::  
* The repository access library::  
* The client operation library::  
@end menu


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Working copies and the working copy library
@section Working copies and the working copy library

Working copies are client-side directory trees containing both versioned
data and Subversion administrative files.  The functions in the working
copy management library are the only functions in Subversion which
operate on these trees.

@menu
* The layout of working copies::  
* The working copy management library::  
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node The layout of working copies
@subsection The layout of working copies

This section gives an overview of how working copies are arranged
physically, but is not a full specification of working copy layout.

As with CVS, Subversion working copies are simply directory trees with
special administrative subdirectories, in this case named ".svn" instead
of "CVS":

@example
@group
                             myproj
                             / | \
               _____________/  |  \______________
              /                |                 \
           .svn               src                doc
        ___/ | \___           /|\             ___/ \___
       |     |     |         / | \           |         |
      base  ...   ...       /  |  \     myproj.texi  .svn
                           /   |   \              ___/ | \___
                      ____/    |    \____        |     |     |
                     |         |         |      base  ...   ...
                   .svn      foo.c     bar.c     |
                ___/ | \___                      |
               |     |     |                     |
             base   ...   ...               myproj.texi
          ___/ \___
         |         |
       foo.c     bar.c

@end group
@end example

Each @file{dir/.svn/} directory records the files in @file{dir}, their
revision numbers and property lists, pristine revisions of all the files
(for client-side delta generation), the repository from which @file{dir}
came, and any local changes (such as uncommitted adds, deletes, and
renames) that affect @file{dir}.

Although it would often be possible to deduce certain information
(such as the original repository) by examining parent directories, this is
avoided in favor of making each directory be as much a self-contained
unit as possible.

For example, immediately after a checkout the administrative information
for the entire working tree @emph{could} be stored in one top-level
file.  But subdirectories instead keep track of their own revision
information.  This would be necessary anyway once the user starts
committing new revisions for particular files, and it also makes it
easier for the user to prune a big, complete tree into a small subtree
and still have a valid working copy.

The .svn subdir contains:

@itemize @bullet

@item
A @file{format} file, which indicates which version of the working copy
adm format this is (so future clients can be backwards compatible
easily).

@item
A @file{repository} file, stating where the directory came from (syntax
TBD).

@item
A @file{text-base} directory, containing the pristine repository
revisions of the files in the corresponding working directory

@item
An @file{entries} file, which holds revision numbers and other
information for this directory and its files, and records the presence
of subdirs.

It may help to think of this file as the functional equivalent of the
CVS/Entries file.

@item 
A @file{props} directory, containing property names and values for each
file in the working directory.

@item 
A @file{prop-base} directory, containing pristine property names and
values for each file in the working directory.

@item
A @file{dir-props} file, recording properties for this directory.

@item
A @file{dir-prop-base} file, recording pristine properties for this
directory.

@item
A @file{lock} file, whose presence implies that some client is currently
operating on the adminstrative area.

@item
A @file{tmp} directory, for holding scratch-work and helping make
working copy operations more crash-proof.

@item
A @file{log} file.  If present, indicates a list of actions that need to
be taken to complete a working-copy-operation that is still "in
progress".

@end itemize

You can read much more about these files in the file
@file{subversion/libsvn_wc/README}.


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node The working copy management library
@subsection The working copy management library

@itemize @bullet
@item
  @b{Requires:}
  @itemize @minus
  @item
a working copy
  @end itemize
@item
  @b{Provides:}
  @itemize @minus
  @item
ability to manipulate the working copy's versioned data
  @item
ability to manipulate the working copy's administrative files
  @end itemize
@end itemize

This library performs "offline" operations on the working copy, and
lives in @file{subversion/libsvn_wc/}.

The API for @var{libsvn_wc} is always evolving;  please read the header
file for a detailed description:  @file{subversion/include/svn_wc.h}.



@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node The repository access library
@section The repository access library

@itemize @bullet
@item
  @b{Requires:}
  @itemize @minus
  @item
network access to a Subversion server
  @end itemize
@item
  @b{Provides:}
  @itemize @minus
  @item
the ability to interact with a repository
  @end itemize
@end itemize

This library performs operations involving communication with the
repository.

The interface defined in @file{subversion/include/svn_ra.h} provides a
uniform interface to both local and remote repository access.

Specifically, @var{libsvn_ra_dav} will provide this interface and speak
to repositories using DAV requests.  At some future point, another
library @var{libsvn_ra_local} will provide the same interface -- but
will link directly to the filesystem library for accessing local disk
repositories.


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node The client operation library
@section The client operation library

@itemize @bullet
@item
  @b{Requires:}
  @itemize @minus
  @item
the working copy management library
  @item
a repository access library
  @end itemize
@item
  @b{Provides:}
  @itemize @minus
  @item
all client-side Subversion commands
  @end itemize
@end itemize

These functions correspond to user-level client commands.  In theory,
any client interface (command-line, GUI, emacs, Python, etc.) should be
able to link to @var{libsvn_client} and have the ability to act as a
full-featured Subversion client.

Again, the detailed API can be found in
@file{subversion/include/svn_client.h}. 

