@node Adds
@chapter Adds

This section describes how the Subversion client deals with the addition
of files and directories. 

@menu
* Adding items::              How to add items to your working copy.
* Committing additions::      How to add items to the repository.
* Additions from updates::    When 'update' tries to add things.
* Replacements::              When you add a previously deleted item.
@end menu


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Adding items
@section Adding items

Adding items consists of two phases:

@enumerate
@item
Make your working copy aware of a new object it contains, effectively
"scheduling" this new object to be added to the repository.
@item
Commit the object to the repository.
@end enumerate

This section describes the first phase.

@table @b
@item To add a file:  @samp{svn add foo.c}

The file @file{foo.c} is now tracked by your working copy.  The
@samp{svn status} command will show the file with status code
@code{A} and at local revision 0 (because it is not yet part of any
repository revision.)

@item To add a directory: @samp{svn add dirname}

The directory @file{dirname} will be added, but not recursively.  If you
want to add everything within @file{dirname}, then you can pass the
@samp{--recursive} flag to @samp{svn add}.  Everything added will
have status code @code{A} and be at revision 0.

(Note that unlike CVS, adding a directory does @emph{not} effect an
immediate change in the repository!)

@item To undo additions before committing: @samp{svn revert [items]}

Because added items have not yet been committed to the repository, it's
easy to make your working copy "forget" that you wanted to add something.
This command will de-schedule items for addition.  The @samp{svn status}
command will no longer show them at all.

@end table


There are two important exceptions which will @emph{prevent} something
from being scheduled for addition.

First, you can't schedule an item to be added if it doesn't exist.  The
@samp{svn add foo} command will check that @file{foo} is an actual
file or directory before succeeding.

Second, you can't schedule an item to be added if any of its parent
directories are scheduled for deletion.  This is a sanity check
performed by @samp{svn add};  it makes no sense to add an item within
a directory that will be destroyed at commit-time. 


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Committing additions
@section Committing additions

If your working copy contains items scheduled for addition and you
@samp{svn commit} them, they will be copied into the repository and
become a permanent part of your tree's history.

As usual, your commit will be rejected if any server-side conflicts
result from your own working copy being out-of-date.

One final rule: you cannot commit an added item if any of its parents
are scheduled for addition but are not included in the same commit.
This is because it would be meaningless to commit a new item to the
repository without a parent to hold that item.  Therefore, to commit
added items that are nested, you must commit from the @emph{top} of the
nesting.

For example, recall our old working copy:

@example
write/Makefile
      document.c
      search.c
      .svn/
@end example

Say we add a new directory @file{fonts} to the working copy:

@example
$ mkdir fonts
$ svn add fonts
$ svn st
_   1       (     1)  .
_   1       (     1)  ./Makefile
_   1       (     1)  ./document.c
_   1       (     1)  ./search.c
A   0       (     1)  ./fonts
@end example

And say we add two new files within @file{fonts}:

@example
$ cp /some/path/font1.ttf fonts/
$ cp /some/path/font2.ttf fonts/
$ svn add fonts/font1.ttf fonts/font2.ttf
$ svn st
_   1       (     1)  .
_   1       (     1)  ./Makefile
_   1       (     1)  ./document.c
_   1       (     1)  ./search.c
A   0       (     1)  ./fonts
A   0       (     1)  ./fonts/font1.ttf
A   0       (     1)  ./fonts/font2.ttf
@end example

So what happens if we try to commit only @file{font1.ttf}?  The command
@samp{svn commit fonts/font1.ttf} will fail, because it attempts to
copy a file to the @file{fonts} directory on the repository -- and no
such directory exists there!

Thus the correct solution is to commit the parent directory.  This will
add @file{fonts} to the repository first, and then add its new contents:

@example
$ svn commit fonts
Adding   ./fonts
Adding   ./fonts/font1.ttf
Adding   ./fonts/font2.ttf
Commit succeeded.
@end example



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Additions from updates
@section Additions from updates

During an update, new files and directories may be added to your working
copy.  This is no surprise.

The only problems that may occur are those times when the items being
added have the same names as non-versioned items already present in your
working copy.  As a rule, Subversion never loses nor hides data in your
working copy -- versioned or not.  Thus for the update to succeed,
you'll have to move your unversioned items out of the way.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Replacements
@section Replacements


@dfn{Replacement} is when you add a new item that has the same name as
an item already scheduled for deletion.   Instead of showing both "D"
and "A" flags simultaneously, an "R" flag is shown.

For example:

@example
$ svn st
_   1       (     1)  .
_   1       (     1)  ./foo.c

$ svn rm foo.c
$ svn st
_   1       (     1)  .
D   1       (     1)  ./foo.c

$ rm foo.c
$ echo "a whole new foo" > foo.c
$ svn add foo.c
$ svn st
_   1       (     1)  .
R   1       (     1)  ./foo.c
@end example

At this point, the replaced item acts like any other kind of addition.
You can undo the replacement by running @samp{svn remove foo.c} -- and
the file's status code will revert back to @code{D}.  If the replaced
item is a directory, you can schedule items within it for addition as
well.

When a replaced item is committed, the client will first delete the
original @file{foo.c} from the repository, and then add the "new"
@file{foo.c}.

Replacements are useful:  the object being replaced can even change
type.  For example, a file @file{foo} can be deleted and replaced with a
directory of the same name, or vice versa.




