@node Removals
@chapter Removals

This section describes how the Subversion client deals with removals of
files and directories.  Many of these behaviors are newly invented,
because they follow from the fact that Subversion is versioning
directories.  (In other words, the CVS model hasn't had to deal with
these scenarios before.)

@menu
* Removing items::              How to remove items from your working copy.
* Committing removals::         How to remove items from the repository.
* Removals in updates::         When 'update' tries to remove things.
@end menu


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Removing items
@section Removing items

The @samp{svn rm} subcommand is used to mark items in your working copy
for removal from the repository.  Note that marking them is not the same
as actually removing them in the repository: the repository is
@emph{never} modified until you run @samp{svn commit} (or @samp{svn
import} for new data).

Also, note that there are two different ways to interpret the phrase "remove
an item".  In the less destructive case, the item is removed from
revision control (i.e. no longer tracked by Subversion), but it is not
removed from your working copy.  In the more destructive case, the item
is removed both from revision control and from disk.

Subversion defaults to the less destructive behavior -- @samp{svn rm} by
itself only removes an item from revision control.  However, if the
@code{-f} flag (@code{--force}) is given, the item(s) will also be
removed from disk.  However, no item containing local modifications will
be removed, nor will items that are @emph{not} under revision control
(you can remove such items by hand).

@table @b
@item To remove a file:  @samp{svn rm foo.c}

This will schedule @file{foo.c} to be deleted from the repository.
The file is still tracked in the administrative directory until the user
commits;  afterwards, the working copy will no longer track the file.

If foo.c is locally modified, this command will return an error
(you'll have to @samp{svn revert} your change).

@item To recursively remove a directory: @samp{svn rm dirname}

This will recursively schedule every item below directory @file{dirname}
to be deleted from the repository.

If any locally modified items live below the directory, this command
will return an error.

@item To undo a deletion before committing:  @samp{svn undel item}

This subcommand will "unmark" a file or directory that is scheduled for
removal.  In the directory case, it does not recurse by default (like
the way @samp{svn rm} does.)  To recurse, use the @code{--recursive}
flag. 

@end table

When an item has been scheduled for removal, but not yet committed, the
client more-or-less treats the item as if it were gone.  Although the
item will still show up in the @samp{svn status} command with a @code{D}
flag next to it, the client will now allow the user to add a @emph{new}
item of the same name.  In this case, the @samp{svn status} output will
describe the item as @dfn{replaced} (with an @code{R} flag).

(todo:  perhaps we should show some examples here...)

This scenario is made even more complicated when the item in question is
a directory.  If a directory is recursively marked for deletion, and
then a directory of the same name is added with @samp{svn add}, the user
can continue to add (or replace) items in the newly added directory.
The @samp{svn status} command would then show the parent directory as
"replaced", and items inside the directory as a mixture of items that
are scheduled to be "deleted", "added", and "replaced".


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Committing removals
@section Committing removals


When the user runs @samp{svn commit}, and items are scheduled for
removal, the items are first removed from the repository.  If there are
server-side conflicts, then (as usual) an error message will explain
that the working copy is out-of-date.

After the items are removed from the repository, all tracking
information about the items is removed from the working copy.  In the
case of a file, its information is removed from @file{.svn/}.  In the
case of a directory, the entire @file{.svn/} administrative area is
removed, as well as all the administrative areas of its subdirectories.

Note that commit never removes any real working files or directories;
that only happens with a @samp{svn rm -f} command, or possibly during a
@samp{svn update}.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Removals in updates
@section Removals in updates

When an update tries to remove a file or directory, the item is not only
removed from local revision control, but the item itself is deleted.  In
the case of a directory removal, this is equivalent to a Unix @samp{rm
-rf} command.

There are two exceptions, for safety's sake:

@itemize @bullet
@item
items that are @emph{not} under revision control will be preserved.
@item
items that are locally modified result in a conflict (C), with the
locally modified version being preserved
@end itemize

Thus it's possible that after an update which recursively removes a
directory, there may be stray path "trails" leading down to individual
locally-modified files that were deliberately saved.

