\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@comment Subversion Handbook
@comment Copyright (C) 2002 CollabNet

@c  ================================================================
@c  Copyright (c) 2002 CollabNet.  All rights reserved.
@c  
@c  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
@c  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
@c  met:
@c  
@c  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
@c  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@c  
@c  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
@c  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
@c  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@c  
@c  3. The end-user documentation included with the redistribution, if
@c  any, must include the following acknowledgment: ``This product includes
@c  software developed by CollabNet (@uref{http://www.Collab.Net/}).''
@c  Alternately, this acknowledgment may appear in the software itself, if
@c  and wherever such third-party acknowledgments normally appear.
@c  
@c  4. The hosted project names must not be used to endorse or promote
@c  products derived from this software without prior written
@c  permission. For written permission, please contact info@collab.net.
@c  
@c  5. Products derived from this software may not use the ``Tigris'' name
@c  nor may ``Tigris'' appear in their names without prior written
@c  permission of CollabNet.
@c  
@c  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED
@c  WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
@c  MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
@c  IN NO EVENT SHALL COLLABNET OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
@c  DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
@c  DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
@c  GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
@c  INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
@c  IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
@c  OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
@c  ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
@c 
@c  ====================================================================
@c  
@c  This software consists of voluntary contributions made by many
@c  individuals on behalf of CollabNet.


@c %**start of header
@setfilename svn-handbook.info
@settitle The Subversion Handbook
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@paragraphindent 0

@c @finalout

@ifinfo
@format
INFO-DIR-SECTION Development
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Subversion Handbook: (svn-handbook).   General guide to Subversion.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@c Browser defaults lose.  Let's go for black text on white background.
@ifhtml
@html
<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF" fgcolor="#000000">
@end html
@end ifhtml

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@titlepage
@title @titlefont{The Subversion Handbook}
@author Subversion Development Project @uref{http://subversion.tigris.org/}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002 CollabNet, Inc. @*
See @ref{License} for details. @*
First version: June 2002. @*
$LastChangedDate$

@end titlepage
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------

@summarycontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top
This manual is a general guide to the Subversion revision control system.

@end ifnottex

@c Here is our logical table of contents.

@menu
* Getting Started::           History, installation and overview of Subversion.
* Client Cookbook::           How to use the Subversion client.
* Repository Administration:: Managing a repository.
* Best Practices::            Tips to use Subversion more effectively.
* Appendices::                Other useful documents and pointers.
@end menu

@include getting_started.texi
@include client.texi
@include repos_admin.texi
@include best_practices.texi
@include appendices.texi

@bye
